Welcome, my name is Jedd Haberstro,
and I'm an Engineer in Apple's GPU, Graphics,
and Displays Software Group.
I'm excited to tell you
about the new Apple family 9 GPU architecture
in A17 Pro and the M3 family of chips,
which are at the heart of iPhone 15 Pro and the new Macs.
Across Apple's product line,
the GPU powers many of the rich user experiences
our customers love.
Whether it be gaming on the go with the new iPhone 15 Pro,
delivering silky smooth UI animations for your apps
on the new iMac,
or leveraging machine learning
to perform advanced video and image processing
on the new MacBook Pros,
the GPU plays a critical role in enabling these apps.
The Metal API is used to harness the computing capabilities
of Apple's GPUs,
and collectively, these apps run a diverse set
of Metal Shading Language programs.
These shader programs can range from small, simple shaders
that execute just a handful of lines of code
to large complex shaders
that spend hundreds of thousands of lines of code,
frameworks, and libraries.
What all these shaders share in common
is massive data parallelism,
which is the opportunity
to greatly improve the performance of an app
by running it in parallel.
This parallelism is achieved
by running Metal shader programs many times over in parallel
on different inputs
such as each vertex in a 3D rendered scene
or each pixel of the screen.
It is the GPU, ultimately,
which is responsible for executing these shaders
in parallel.
At the heart of every GPU are its shader cores.
Each shader core can run thousands of threads in parallel.
And to scale performance even further,
a GPU will have many shader cores
that can also run in parallel,
giving an app tens of thousands
of parallel threads of execution.
Already, the GPUs in today's existing iPhones, iPads,
and Macs, have incredible performance.
As well as a powerful suite of developer tools
to allow app developers to maximize the GPU's potential.
But with the new Apple family 9 GPUs,
we are increasing performance to unprecedented levels
thanks to several new exciting advancements.
First is a brand new shader core architecture
that improves the performance and power efficiency
of your existing apps,
which, right away, benefits the experience you deliver
while also meeting the demanding challenges
of the next-generation of apps that you will build.
Hardware-accelerated ray tracing transparently benefits apps
that already use Metal's ray tracing APIs,
as well as expands the opportunities to use ray tracing
to achieve rich rendering effects with great performance.
And with hardware-accelerated mesh shading,
apps can build advanced geometry processing pipelines
like never before.
Before we discuss these in more detail,
let's look at the incredible performance
apps are already able to achieve
with no changes on the new Apple family 9 GPUs.
This is "Baldur's Gate 3" by Larian Studios,
running on the new MacBook Pro with M3 Macs pictured on top,
and a MacBook Pro with M2 Macs pictured on bottom.
Each rendering with ultra video quality settings at 1800p.
The M3 Macs is able to deliver
significant performance improvements,
thanks to the next-generation shader core's ability
to run the game's Metal shaders
with higher thread occupancy.
Here is Blender rendering an image of a barbershop scene
using the Cycles Path Tracer,
which leverages Metal Ray Tracing on M3 Macs.
Both Renders were started at the same exact time,
but thanks to hardware-accelerated ray tracing
and the next-generation shader core,
the Render on the M3 Macs converges significantly faster.
This is a real-time visualization
of the "Toy Story 4" Antiques Mall USD
rendered by Pixar's Hydra Storm.
Hydra Storm uses Metal mesh shading on M3 Macs,
which when combined with hardware-accelerated mesh shading
runs faster than ever before.
Let's now look at each of these features in more detail,
starting with the next generation shader core.
The Apple family 9 GPUs are composed
of several building blocks
such as compute and vertex command processors
that parse your Metal command buffers,
a rasterizer that dispatches fragment shaders for execution,
and a hierarchy of caches,
including the GPU last level cache
that services all GPU memory traffic.
But central to any GPU are its shader cores.
These are the building blocks
that execute your app's Metal shaders.
The shader core is also paired with a texture unit
that can sample and write your texture resources,
as well as a brand new ray tracing unit
that accelerates ray intersection requests.
A shader core can be further subdivided
into its constituent parts.
Each shader core has an array of execution pipelines
that execute different types of instructions,
such as FP32, FP16, and Integer math,
which correspond to operations on variables in your shaders
with Metal data types such as float, half, and int,
as well as memory pipelines for read and write operations
to textures and buffers.
Keeping all of these execution pipelines busy
usually requires executing instructions
from multiple SIMDgroups.
So there's a pool that keeps track of the SIMDgroups
that are running on a shader core,
and a scheduler that chooses which SIMDgroup
to execute instructions from next.
Typically, there's also a handful of on-chip memories
for storing the different types of data
a shader program may use,
such as registers for storing the values of variables,
threadgroup and tile memory
for storing data shared across a compute threadgroup
or color attachment data shared across the tile,
and a cache to improve the performance of accesses
to the stack and to buffers.
With this understanding of what a shader core does
and its constituent pieces,
I'd like to explain three new exciting advancements
in the Apple family 9 GPU shader core.
These advancements will increase the performance
of your shaders with no changes to your app.
But by better understanding how this new shader core works,
you'll be able to benefit from it to an even greater degree.
The first change is dynamic shader core memory,
which allows an app to achieve better thread occupancy,
and as a result, often better performance.
The second change is the flexible on-chip memory.
This will increase the efficiency
by which your shaders access buffer, stack, threadgroup,
and tile memory.
The last change is the shader core's
high-performance ALU pipelines,
which have increased their ability to execute in parallel.
This will improve the performance of apps
that perform a combination of floating point
or integer math.
Before further exploring these new features,
let's dive into more detail
about how a shader core keeps its execution pipelines busy
and the importance of thread occupancy in this endeavor.
Suppose your Metal shader,
after executing some math operations
using the ALU pipelines, reads a buffer
whose result will be used immediately after.
Accessing the buffer
may require going all the way to device memory,
which is a long latency operation.
During this time,
the SIMDgroup can't execute other operations,
which causes the ALU pipelines to go unused.
To mitigate this, the shader core can execute instructions
from a different SIMDgroup,
which may have some ALU instructions of its own.
This reduces the amount of time the ALUs go and used
and allows the SIMDgroups to run in parallel,
thus improving performance.
If there are additional SIMDgroups
running on the shader core,
this can be done many times over
until the ALUs and other execution pipelines
are never starved of instructions to execute.
The number of SIMDgroups
that are concurrently running on a shader core
is called its thread occupancy.
But you may be asking yourself,
what dictates how many SIMDgroups
will be running concurrently on a shader core?
To answer that question, let's look at an example.
This is a prototypical ray tracing compute kernel
that intersects a ray with an acceleration structure,
inspects the intersection result,
and then executes a different shading function
based on the material of the primitive intersected.
In this example,
it supports shading both glass and leather materials.
Each line of code will use some amount of registers
to store the program's variables.
At different points of the program,
more or fewer registers will be used
depending on what the code does.
In this particular example,
the implementation of the shadeGlass function
uses many more registers than the rest of the program.
Prior to the Apple family 9 GPU,
a SIMDgroup could not begin execution on a shader core
until it allocated registers from the on-chip register file.
The amount allocated would be equal
to the maximum register usage at any point in the program.
The SIMDgroup would keep that many registers allocated
for the entire duration of the SIMDgroup,
even though most of those registers may go unused
in large sections of the program.
Thus, based on the maximum register usage,
we may only be able to run, for example,
four SIMDgroups at a time on a shader core
because any more would require
more on-chip register filed memory than exists.
However, thanks to the Apple family 9 GPU's
new dynamic shader core memory feature,
the maximum register usage no longer dictates
how many SIMDgroups can be run.
On-chip register memory is now dynamically allocated
and deallocated over the lifetime of the shader
according to what each part of the program actually uses.
This allows SIMDgroups to make much more efficient use
of the on-chip register file, freeing up space
that would not have been available otherwise.
This can have a profound impact
on your app's thread occupancy,
and ultimately, its performance
by allowing many more SIMDgroups to run concurrently.
As I just mentioned,
registers are now dynamically allocated and deallocated
over the course of a SIMDgroup's lifetime.
This is in part possible
because the register file is now a cache
instead of the permanent storage for the registers,
meaning more registers can be used
that can be stored on chip.
The flexible on-chip memory feature extends this treatment
to the rest of the shader core's memory types,
such as threadgroup and tile memory,
making that a cache too.
And now that register, threadgroup, tile, stack,
and buffer data are all cached on chip,
this has allowed us to redesign the on-chip memories
into fewer larger caches
that service all these memory types.
This flexibility will benefit shaders
that don't make heavy use of each memory type.
In the past, if a compute kernel didn't use, for example,
threadgroup memory, its corresponding on-chip storage
would go completely unused.
Now, the on-chip storage will be dynamically assigned
to the memory types that are used by your shaders,
giving them more on-chip storage than they had in the past,
and ultimately, better performance.
For example, for shaders with heavy register usage,
that may mean higher occupancy.
For shaders that repeatedly access a large working set
of buffer data, that will mean better cache hit rates,
lower buffer access latency, and thus, better performance.
And for apps that make heavy use of non-inline functions,
such as function pointers, visible function tables,
and dynamically linked shader libraries,
this means more on-chip stack space
to pass function parameters,
and thus, faster function calls.
But what happens if your app still uses more memory
than there is on-chip storage for?
Unmitigated, that data will spill to the next cache level
or even to main memory.
Fortunately, the shader core will dynamically monitor
your shaker's behavior and adjust the occupancy level
to prevent this from occurring.
This keeps data on chip.
And ultimately, the execution pipelines busy.
This does mean, however,
that your shader's occupancy will be impacted
by how your shader's access threadgroup, tile,
stack, and buffer memory
in addition to its dynamic register usage.
These new hardware capabilities
improve the occupancy of many apps,
meaning you, the developer, need to optimize occupancy
a lot less often than in the past.
But if you do need to optimize occupancy further
on Apple family 9 GPUs,
we have developed a suite of profiling tools to help you.
To learn more about how to diagnose and optimize occupancy,
please refer to these talks.
The last feature of the Apple family 9 GPU shader core
I'd like to discuss is its high-performance ALU pipelines.
Apple GPU shader cores have separate ALU pipelines
for different instruction types,
including FP16 instructions.
Apple GPUs are highly optimized to execute FP16 arithmetic.
And we recommend that you'll use FP16 data types
wherever possible.
FP16 math instructions execute at peak throughput.
They use fewer registers than their FP32 equivalents.
They reduce memory bandwidth
if your buffers store data natively in FP16.
And for situations where the source
or destination variable of a math operation
is not FP16 already,
it can be converted to and from at no cost.
But if your app still performs other math operations,
such as FP32 and integer,
the Apple family 9 GPU shader core can execute instructions
from all three data types in parallel
to a greater degree than ever before.
This can deliver up to 2x ALU performance
compared to prior Apple GPUs.
In order to take advantage of this extra parallelism,
instructions must be executed from multiple SIMDgroups,
which means increasing occupancy
can improve the utilization of the ALU pipelines.
Let's consider an example.
Imagine there are two SIMDgroups running concurrently,
both executing ALU instructions.
In the past, these SIMDgroups may have had to run
one after another.
But if they have FP32 and FP16 instructions
to execute at different points in time, as depicted here,
then their executions can be overlapped,
increasing parallelism and performance.
To recap what's new in the next-generation shader core,
it will dynamically allocate and deallocate registers
over the lifetime of a shader,
which improves its thread occupancy.
It has a large on-chip cache
that services registers, threadgroup, tile, stack,
and buffer memory, which improves the performance
of accessing those memory types.
The shader core will dynamically adjust occupancy
to keep data on chip and the execution pipelines busy.
And finally, FP16, FP32 and integer operations
can execute in parallel more than ever,
increasing ALU performance.
Next, let's take a look at hardware-accelerated ray tracing.
With Metal ray tracing,
apps can leverage the massive parallelism of Apple GPUs
to intersect rays with their scene geometry.
If you're not familiar with Metal ray tracing
and would like to learn more,
please watch Your guide to Metal ray tracing
and Enhance your app with Metal ray tracing.
At the heart of the Metal ray chasing API
is the intersector object
that is responsible for determining
the intersection point of a ray
with the primitives contained in an acceleration structure.
It is often invoked many times over
by ray tracing app's GPU functions, also known as shaders,
and thus, is central to the app's performance.
Earlier, I showed such AGPU function
when I looked at the register usage
of this raytracingKernel.
It creates an intersector object
and finds an intersection
by calling the object's intersect method.
To determine the intersection point,
the intersector performs a few key stages.
First, it traverses the acceleration structure
to find a candidate primitive.
It then invokes an intersection function,
which may be provided by the app,
to determine if the rate intersects the primitive.
If it does,
the intersection is compared to previous intersections
and the process is repeated until the closest is found.
The closest intersection is then returned
to the calling GPU function
for further app-specific processing.
New in Apple family 9 GPUs,
the implementation of the intersector object
is hardware-accelerated,
which greatly increases the performance
of this critical operation.
The hardware-accelerated intersection
does not execute in line with the GPU function.
Thus, to facilitate the communication of the ray
and the ray payload between the two,
data is read and written to on-chip memory,
which you can observe
using the RT scratch performance counters in the new Xcode.
Now that I've discussed the role
and responsibilities of the intersector,
let's dissect the performance characteristics
of onetime through this intersector loop using an example.
Imagine our app is executing two SIMDgroups
that each wish to intersect four rays
with an acceleration structure.
In this example,
our acceleration structure contains
the classic kernel boxing,
with one box object and one sphere object.
The rays are cast into the scene
by calling the intersect method,
passing it the ray, the acceleration structure,
and the intersection function table.
Each SIMDgroup has two rays that intersect the box
and two the intersect the sphere.
In this example,
the box is defined as opaque triangle primitives
by using the MTLAccelerationStructure
TriangleGeometryDescriptor
and setting its opaque property to yes,
thus, the intersection can compute the intersections
using Metal's built-in intersection function.
However, the sphere is defined procedurally
using a custom bounding box intersection function
that the intersection must invoke.
The custom BoundingBoxIntersection function is declared
using the intersection attribute
with the bounding_box parameter.
As I mentioned before,
the intersect method is called by each thread
that is testing a ray against the acceleration structure.
So with this example in mind,
let's look at how each intersect calls traversal
and intersection test are executed
in a traditional implementation.
In typical usage,
not all traversals will take the same amount of time
to locate a primitive to test the ray against.
This creates what is called execution divergence,
which causes each thread in a SIMDgroup
to wait for the longest traversal from that SIMDgroup
before proceeding to the next stage.
And as it turns out,
the same overhead compounds
when executing the intersection functions too.
Execution divergence causes each type
of intersection function to run one after another,
further reducing parallelism.
An aggregate across both stages,
each thread spends a large proportion of its runtime idle,
waiting on the other threads in the SIMDgroup to complete,
which is a major performance bottleneck.
With that picture of a traditional implementation in mind,
let's discuss how hardware-accelerated ray tracing
optimizes those inefficiencies.
The first major improvement
is that the hardware intersector
is able to run each traversal completely independently
using fixed function hardware.
This is possible in part
because the arrays are sent to the hardware intersector
for processing
instead of executing in line with the GPU function.
This greatly decreases the time spent traversing
and also removes the overhead
of the traditional traversal's execution divergence.
On the other hand, the intersection functions
are Metal shading language code,
so they still must be grouped into SIMDgroups
to be run on the shader core.
However, because the hardware intersector
executes each ray independently,
it is free to group together the intersection function calls
from rays that originated from separate SIMDgroups.
This is the role of the reorder stage.
When rays reach this stage within close proximity and time,
the intersection function calls
will be grouped into coherent SIMDgroups,
such that the execution divergence overhead
present in the traditional implementation is reduced
or even completely eliminated.
So now that I've shown you
how hardware-accelerated ray tracing
improves the performance
of your app's ray intersector calls,
let's review some best practices
that your apps can implement to maximize its benefits.
Our first suggestion is to use the intersector object API
whenever possible.
Metal also allows ray tracing
to be performed using the intersection query API,
but this API increases
the amount of ray trace scratch memory
that must be read and written,
as well as disables the reorder stage.
We also recommend
when authoring custom intersection functions
to avoid creating one uber function
that is capable of executing
many different logical intersection routines.
Instead, create one Metal intersection function
for each logical intersection routine.
This increases the benefits of the reorder stage.
It is also important to try to minimize
the size of the ray payload structure that has passed to
and return from the intersector object.
This will decrease your shader's latency
and potentially increase its thread occupancy.
For more details and guidance
about how to optimize your ray tracing apps,
please watch these talks.
To recap, the Apple family 9 GPUs
greatly improved the performance of ray tracing
through new hardware acceleration
that features fixed function traversal blocks
and an intersection function reorder stage.
And although this new hardware
will improve the performance of all Metal ray tracing apps,
to maximize the benefits your app derives from it,
it's best to use the intersection API
instead of the intersection query API whenever possible.
The last advancement in the Apple family 9 GPUs
that I'd like to talk to you about
is hardware-accelerated mesh shading.
Mesh shading is a flexible,
GPU-driven geometry processing stage
in the rendering pipeline
that replaces the traditional vertex shader stage
with two compute-like shaders.
Object shaders execute in the first stage
and can be used to perform coarse grain processing
of app-specific inputs such as entire mesh objects.
Each object threadgroup can choose to spawn a mesh group
to perform subsequent finer grain processing.
Mesh shaders comprise the second stage.
Typically, a mesh threadgroup will process
a constituent piece of the parent object,
often referred to as a meshlet.
The output of the mesh threadgroup
is a Metal mesh object that encapsulates
a list of vertices and primitives
to be processed by the remainder
of the traditional graphics pipeline.
Mesh shading has numerous applications,
such as fine-grained geometry calling,
procedural geometry generation,
custom app-specific geometry representations,
such as compressed formats.
And for porting geometry and tessellation shaders
from other graphics APIs.
If you're unfamiliar with mesh shading in Metal,
I recommend that you check out the two talks below.
With hardware-accelerated mesh shading
on Apple family 9 GPUs,
the most notable improvement you'll observe
is much improved performance
of your existing mesh shading code..
Apple family 9 GPUs
are able to much more efficiently schedule object
and mesh threadgroups
to keep intermediate meshlet data on chip.
Thus, reducing memory traffic.
With the new hardware
also comes several Metal API enhancements.
The first is support for encoding draw mesh commands
into indirect command buffers.
This allows GPU-driven rendering pipelines
to make use of mesh shading
in addition to traditional vertex shaders.
The second API enhancement
expands the maximum number of threadgroups per mesh grid
from 1,024 to over 1 million.
Let's now review a couple of best practices
to ensure optimal mesh shading performance.
The metal::mesh object output by a mesh threadgroup
has several template parameters
whose size are important to keep as small as possible.
For the mesh's vertex and primitive data types,
this can be done, for example, by removing unused attributes
that may be present due to sharing those data types
with other unrelated vertex or mesh functions.
The mesh type must also specify
the maximum number of primitives and vertices
that may be output.
These should not be set any larger
than what your app's geometry, pipeline, and assets
actually need.
Being mindful of these sizes will reduce memory traffic
and may increase occupancy.
If performing per primitive calling in a mesh shader,
we don't recommend writing vertex positions
to the mesh object
just to be called by the hardware subsequent calling stage.
Instead, it is best to completely omit
writing such primitives
as that can save substantial processing time
in the remainder
of the hardware's geometry processing stages.
All right, let's recap what I covered
about the Apple family 9 GPUs.
The next-generation shader core
increases on-chip memory utilization
for better thread occupancy and performance
by dynamically allocating register storage
and sharing on-chip memory across many memory types.
Hardware-accelerated ray tracing
greatly improves the performance of apps
using the Metal ray tracing APIs,
enabling new high-fidelity visual effects.
And finally, mesh shading performance is greatly improved
thanks to hardware acceleration,
enabling more apps to customize
their geometry processing pipeline.
Thank you for watching.